## Systems calls, exceptions, and interrupts

With a system call a user program can ask for an operating system service, as we saw at the end of the last chapter. The term exception refers to an illegal program action that generates an interrupt. 

Examples of illegal programs actions include divide by zero, attempt to access memory for a PTE that is not present, and so on. The term in-terrupt refers to a signal generated by a hardware device, indicating that it needs attention of the operating system. 

For example, a clock chip may generate an interrupt every 100 msec to allow the kernel to implement time sharing. As another example, when the disk has read a block from disk, it generates an interrupt to alert the operating system that the block is ready to be retrieved.

The kernel handles all interrupts, rather than processes handling them, because in most cases only the kernel has the required privilege and state. For example, in order to time-slice among processes in response the clock interrupts, the kernel must be involved, if only to force uncooperative processes to yield the processor.

In all three cases, the operating system design must arrange for the following to
happen. The system must save the processor’s registers for future transparent resume.
The system must be set up for execution in the kernel. The system must chose a place for the kernel to start executing. The kernel must be able to retrieve information about the event, e.g., system call arguments. It must all be done securely; the system must maintain isolation of user processes and the kernel.

To achieve this goal the operating system must be aware of the details of how the
hardware handles system calls, exceptions, and interrupts. In most processors these three events are handled by a single hardware mechanism. For example, on the x86, a program invokes a system call by generating an interrupt using the int instruction.

Similarly, exceptions generate an interrupt too. Thus, if the operating system has a plan for interrupt handling, then the operating system can handle system calls and exceptions too.

The basic plan is as follows. An interrupts stops the normal processor loop and
starts executing a new sequence called an interrupt handler. Before starting the interrupt handler, the processor saves its registers, so that the operating system can restore them when it returns from the interrupt. A challenge in the transition to and from the interrupt handler is that the processor should switch from user mode to kernel mode, and back.

A word on terminology: Although the official x86 term is interrupt, xv6 refers to
all of these as traps, largely because it was the term used by the PDP11/40 and therefore is the conventional Unix term. 

This chapter uses the terms trap and interrupt interchangeably, but it is important to remember that traps are caused by the current process running on a processor (e.g., the process makes a system call and as a result generates a trap), and interrupts are caused by devices and may not be related to the currently running process. For example, a disk may generate an interrupt when it is done retrieving a block for one process, but at the time of the interrupt some other process may be running. 

This property of interrupts makes thinking about interrupts more difficult than thinking about traps, because interrupts happen concurrently with other activities. Both rely, however, on the same hardware mechanism to transfer control between user and kernel mode securely, which we will discuss next.