# xv6 file system 

## file system 

File system:

- Purpose:
  - Organization and storage files
- General support:
  - Sharing data between users and applications
  - Opening: After restart, the data is still available

Realization is difficult:

- Data structure on disk: file, directory, record
- Incorrect recovery
- Multiple different processes may operate the file system simultaneously
- The speed of accessing the disk is slower than the memory, and the file system should use memory to cache hot blocks.



### XV6 file system overview

Seven layers implementation:

- Disk layer:  reads and write disk blocks
- Buffer Cache layer: cache, synchronization block
- Logging layer: Support high-level transaction operation: When the fault, a set of operations is done, or don't do it.
- Inode layer: Provides a unique identifier I-Number to each file.
- Directory layer: Implement directory - a special inode, content is "directory entry" Directory Entries - contains file names and I-Number.
- Pathname layer: Implement a hierarchical path name, support recursive queries: E.G.  `/usr/rtm/xv6/fs.c`
- File Descriptor layer: Abstract various UNIX resources with file descriptors (pipelines, devices, files, etc.)

In order to store inodes and content blocks, XV6 divide the disk into several areas:

- `block 0`: Reserved, start the sector
- block 1:  Superblock: Contains file system metadata (file system size, data block number, number of inode ...)
  - By `mkfs` Fill in: Initialize the file system
- `block 2~L`: Log
- `block L~I`：inodes
- `block I~B`: Bitmap: Record those data blocks in use
- `block B~`:data block



### Buffer Cache layer

#### Buffer Cache work:

- Synchronous access disk block: Only one copy of the copy exists, and only one kernel thread at a time can use this copy
- Cache often used blocks - do not have to repeatedly read from disk (slow disk)

buffer （`struct buf`: Bio.h) is the entity in buffer cache. Store the disk block that copies to the memory.

Buffer Cache is a bidirectional linked list of buffers.

#### Key interface (`bio.c`）：

* binit  : Initialized chain list, based on a size NBUF buf Array 
  * Access to the list: bcache.head
  * Do not directly access the buf array
* bread  : Copy a block to BUF for reading, modify (in memory)

- bget:  Get buffer from a given sector:
  - Returns existing cache: return directly
  - No cache: new allocation: the longest recycling has not been used[1](https://www.programmersought.com/article/66448760057/#fn1)Cache: Recycle the Least Recessly Used (LRU) Unused Buffer
- If you need to read, call the Virtue_Disk_rw read disk.

- bwrite: Write the modified BUF block back to the hard disk
- brelse : Free use of buf
  - Move buffer to the list: Maintaining the bidirectional linked header indicates recently, the tail is the longest
  - This way BGET can quickly complete the scan using a two-way lin list:
    - The first pass is started from the beginning (from bcache.head, to the next direction), finding whether there is a cache: recently used it is likely to be used again, this may reduce scan time
    - When I didn't find it, the second time I started from the end (from bcache.head, going to the PREV direction), find a unused: I haven't used it for a long time.

Thread security: Every buffer is a Sleep-Lock:

- BREAD returns to the lock BUF
- BRELSE Release Lock

Note: You must ensure that a disk sector can only have a cache.

In the XV6 implementation, too many processes will request access to the file system, Buffers are busy, and BGET will directly PANIC. The more elegant processing scheme is sleep until there is available free buffer, but this program may be dead.



### Logging layer

The logging layer is used to support the recovery of the fault condition: atomic operation - either a set of operation is complete, either completely.

Disk operations may be a set, such as file truncation (truncation, this word seems to be truncated) - set the file length to zero & release content block.

When a fault occurs, the content block can be released first, but the original inode also points to this block. This allows the system to release the new file in the released block, and then there are two inode points to the same file, this is very safe.

Xv6 solves this abnormal situation by the Logging layer:

- XV6 system call does not write disk directly
- Instead, write the wishes of the disk to a disk.*log* (That is, it is not going to write the real block, but write a temporary copy)
- When this system calls written all its write wishes, write a special*commit* Record, indicating that the log has a complete operation.
- The system is then executed to perform these logs (that is, writing those temporary copies to the real position)
- Remove the entire LOG after all execution is complete.

When you encounter a fault restart, the file system will make recovery before running any process:

- If the log contains a complete operation (COMMIT), do these write;
- If the log operation is incomplete (no commit) is ignored

(After the recovery code is executed, the log is empty)





### Log design

LOG is stored in a known fixed position, which is specified in SuperBlock.

Log contains:

- Header Block: Head block, contains a number of "Conut", sector number (corresponding to each Logged Block)
- Logged Blocks: a series of updated copies of the copy

header.count：

- When submitted "Commit", the count in the header increases.
- When copying the logged blocks to the real file system, it is 0.

and so:

- Crash before commit, count is 0 => ignore, no execution;
- The COUNT is not 0 => to perform recovery after commit.

*group commit*: Putting multiple file system calls set in a commit:

- Reduce the number of disk operations

- Improve concurrency

  XV6 fixed the space on the disk - only limited LOG block:

- Enough for general system calls

- For calls such as Write possible operation, you need to divide large operation into multiple small calls, so that each small call satisfies the size limit of the log.



### LOG implementation

In the system call, the call to the log is approximately as follows:

```c
begin_op();
...
bp = bread(...);
bp->data[...] = ...;
log_write(bp);
...
end_op();
```

##### begin_op 

- Start a file system operation (transaction)
- Waiting until there is no commit on progress
- Then wait until you use enough log space for use
- increase log.outstanding  (Here Outstanding It is unrelenting with unresolved, unfinished)
  - Keep space
  - Prevent commit execution

##### log_write

- Record the sector number of the block in memory
- Leave a location in the hard disk for it
  - If you write a block multiple times, keep the same location
    - This is called *absorption*：absorption several disk writes into one
    - Can save log space to improve write performance
- Then mark the buffer is being used to prevent recycling - blocks to stay in the cache until commit

##### log_op 

End a file system operation (transaction)

- Outstanding minus 1
- If OUTSTANDING is 0 commit() ;
  - `write_log()`: Write the modified block written from Cache to log
  - `write_head()`: Modifying log header (here is the point of commit: First, discard it, then restore it)
  - `install_trans`: Write Log to the actual location in the file system
  - Set the log header 's Counter to 0, complete the transaction

When the system starts, before running the user process, it will call`fsinit` -> `initlog` -> `recover_from_log` -> `install_trans` Realize recovery.



### Block allocator implementation

Files and directories are stored in blocks of disks, and the new file must be distributed from an idle pool.

XV6 uses the "Free Bitmap" to maintain allocation.

A bitmap represents a block in a bitmap:

- 0: Represents block idle
- 1: Indicates the block in use

`mkfs` The bit of Boot Sector, Superblock, Log Blocks, Inode Blocks, and Bitmap Block is set.

Block allocation mainly provides two functions:

##### balloc 

: Assign a block

- Consider each block, from 0 to sb.size  (The total number of blocks in the file system), here is a nested loop:
  - Outer loop reads all blocks of Bitmap
  - The inner layer is cycled to check all BPB bit in a Bitmap block.
- If the bitmap value of the block is 0, it is considered to be empty.
- If you find an idle block, update the bitmap value, return block



##### bfree 

Release block (make idle):

- Find the correct Bitmap block, remove the corresponding bit

In Balloc and BFREE, it is not directly read and write bitmap, but indirectly through Bread, Brelse to solve concurrency problems, avoid using a bright lock.

Note: Balloc, BFree can only be called in transactions.



### Inode layer

There are two kinds of inode:

- On-Disk: Data structure on disk: contains the size of the file, the block number list of data is in the data.
- In-Memry: Copy of on-Disk inode in memory, and attach additional information required to the kernel

In the disk, inode is placed in the continuous inode blocks. The length of each inode is fixed, so it is easy to find the nth INode - here is the I-Number.

ON-Disk inode definition`struct dinode` （`fs.h`）：

- The TYPE field represents the type of file (file, dir, dev ...), Type is 0 indicates that inode is idle.
- How many directorys have been recorded in the NLINK field record. Inode is not released in more than 0
- SIZE: The length of the file (bytes)
- AddRS: array, number of records of each block of file content

In-Memory Inode is defined as`struct inode`（`file.h`）：

- Contain`struct dinode` All fields
- Only when there is a C pointer pointing to Inode, the kernel will only store an in-memory inode, put it in a cache (itable)
  - Iget: Get an inode pointer (`struct inode *`）
  - IPUT: Release Inode Pointer
- The extended REF field represents the number of C pointers that reference this in-Memory Inode, and the kernel will drop this inode after the REF is 0.
  - iget：ref++
  - iput：ref–

Inode related lock mechanism:

- icache.lock  

  (The current code is ITable.lock)

  - Ensure that a inode can only appear once in cache (table)
  - To ensure that the REF field of the cached inode (in Table) is equal to the number of pointers that reference inode

- inode.lock

  : Every in-memory inode has a Sleep Lock

  - Guaranteed mutual exclusion (only one visit at the same time):
    - All fields of Inode (such as file length)
    - Inode content block

- ilock() ： iget 

  The content returned may be invalid (not in the cache), in order to ensure that the memory copy and the disk are consistent, you must call ilock：

  - Ilock locks inode (other process can nock iLock it)
  - If you need (yet not read), read inode from disk

Call immediately after modifying inode`iupdate` Write the data to disk.



### Inode implementation

To assign a new inode (for example, to create a new file), call`ialloc`：

- Traverse the inode table on the disk by block, find a marked as free.
- After finding, change your TYPE, write back disk
- Return`iget` Get the INODE pointer.
- Positiveness: Only one process at the same time can get BP: When you find inode and modify, there is no other process to run concurrently.

Before reading the metadata or content of the inode, you must call`ilock`：

- Use Sleep-Lock to ensure that inode's mutual exclusion (listening to him)
- Read inode from cache or hard drive
- `iunlock` Release lock, may awaken the process in sleep waiting

`iput` ：

- Release the C pointer of Inode
- Reduce inode
- If the pointer reference number drops to 0, release inode cache
- If the number of pointers is 0, the number of LINK's LINK is also 0 (without a directory reference), release inode and its data block:
  - transfer `itrunc` Truncate to 0 length
  - Release data block
  - Set the inode type to 0 (indicating that it is not used)
  - Write inode back hard drive

Pay attention to IPUT:

- Any system call for the file system (even what is read, it is read only), it may call`iput`Finally, the operation of a write disk (when the file is 0). So any file system (even read-only) system calls must pack the code in transactions.
- IPUT will not cut off files to zero size without LINK, because there may be a pointer to reference the inode, that is, there may be a process in reading and writing. In this case, if the final file descriptor is released before (truncated the file) fails, the file will be marked as assigned, but it is actually not any directory entity points to it. Solution:
  - When it is restored after restart, scan the entire file system and discovered that this file is released.
  - The file system records this LINK number of 0 but references is not 0, but a list recorded in Superblock). When the file system releases the file, remove the corresponding inode number from the list. When restored, all files in the list directly release
  - (The XV6 is not implemented, so as time goes, this can have such a disk space that cannot be accessed)



### Inode content implementation

`struct dinode` Save the file size and block numbers list.

The file data corresponding to the inode can be from`dinode.addrs` An array acquisition:

- Before NDIRECT Direct Blocks' numbers are written directly in array

  - Here you can store the file before`NDIRECT * BSIZE = 12KB`

- Next NINDIRECT  A block of columns in a data block (Indirect Block), inode.addrs 

  The last element saves the address of the block

  - Here you can store the file next`NINDIRECT * BSIZE = 256KB`

`bmap(ip, bn)` The function returns the block number of the magnetic disk of the IP of the IP of the IP:

- First look at whether it is in ndirect, then find it from Indrect Block
- If IP doesn't have this block, BMAP will allocate one
- If BN exceeds`NDIRECT + NINDIRECT`, BMAP will PANIC

`itrunc` Release the block:

- Release direct block first
- Then release the block in the block
- The last release of the block itself

`readi`: Reading file content from inode (data)

`writei`: Write documents to inode

`stati`: Copy the inode metadata to the STAT structure (exposed to the user program via the STAT system).



### Directory layer

table of Contents:

- Inode Type is`T_DIR`
- The content is a series of "directory entries" (Directory Entries)

Catalog entry:`struct dirent` （`fs.h`）

- File Inode: 0 Expressive
- File name: Most`DIRSIZ = 14` Character

`dirlookup(dp, name, poff)`: Search for a given name Name in the directory represented by inode for DP, if you find the target inode acquired by Iget, the POFF is set to the offset of the target entry in the DP directory (Byte).

`dirlink(dp, name, inum)`: Write a new entry in DP (Name, Inum)

- First call the Dirlookup to check if the file name exists: if there is an error that will be returned
- Find an idle entry by incrementing the offset OFF to traverse the directory.`inum == 0`), Find it in advance
- Write the entry of Name, Inum to the OFF: If you find the idle, you can add one (if you are not crossing) if it is looped.



### Pathname layer

Path Name query is a series of Dirlookup calls:

- `namei(path)` (Fs.c) Analytical paths and return to the corresponding inode.
- `nameiparent(path, name)` Analyze the path, return to its parent directory, write the final file name to Name.

Namei and NameParent are called`namex` To complete the real work.

`namex(path, nameiparent, name)`：

- Judgment absolute / relative path:

  - Path`/` At the beginning, start from the root directory.
  - Otherwise starting from the current directory

- use skipelem  

  Come get a name, step-by-step query

  - Improve parallel and ensure correct: lock the current directory while querying each directory, query is released

Note that there is possible Namex to find a certain level, another process deletes it (unlink), then it is wrong. In order to avoid this:

- In Namex, you will get inode with Iget in call Dirlookup.
- Iget will increase the number of inodes
- Namex only released the lock of Dirlookup returns the lock of the directory
- After the lock is released, the other thread can be from the directory unlink inode
- However, since the reference number of inode is not 0, INODE will not be deleted.

Namex dead lock:

- E.g. Analysis`.` When NEXT points to INODE
- SOLVE: Before getting Next, first release the lock of the current directory first



### File Descriptor layer

The file descriptor layer realizes all the documents of UNIX.

XV6 assigns a separate open file table for each process (Table of Open Files), a file descriptor.

Each open file is by one`struct file` Representation. FILE contains:

- Packing inode or PIPE what
- I / O offset (Offset)
- REF field: Used to track reference
- Readable, Writable: Reading, only written or both

transfer `open` To open the file (create a new Struct File)

- Multiple processes open the same file: each process has a separate I / O Offsets
- One process can also open the same file multiple times (E.G. Via DUP)

All open files in the system will be placed in a global file table -`ftable` (File.c: 20). The following operations are all modified this table:

- Assign files:`filealloc`: Find a reference number of 0 in the table, REF is set to 1, return
- Copy reference:`filedup`：ref++
- Release reference:`fileclose`: Ref-, the reference is 0, according to the type of file, clean up work
- Read and write data:`fileread`，`filewrite`: First check if there is readable or writeable, then complete the IO according to different file types (Inode, Pipe, DEV)
- Metadata:`filestat`: Only for files for inode, call`stati` Complete true work





## System call

System call on file system: sysfile.c

It is basically a variety of calls to the front layer.





## file system interface

### system call

* int chdir (char *dir) 
  :  Change the current directory
* int mkdir(char *dir) 
  :  Create a new directory
* int open(char *file, O_CREATE) 
  : Create a new file
* int mknod(char *file, int, int) *
  :    Create a new device file (after the two parameters are  Main device number*、*Secondary device number*These two numbers uniquely determine one device in the kernel), for the READ, WRITE of the device file to the device, not the file system.
* int link(char *file1, char *file2) 
  : Create a new link for File1 (name) file2
* int unlink(char *file) 
  : Remove the file (NLINK - = 1), when NLINK == 0 and no file descriptor points to the file, the disk space of the file is released.
* int fstat(int fd, struct stat *st) 
  :     Put the information of an open file (fd) in ST
* int stat(char *file, struct stat *st) 
  : Write the information of the file (file) of the specified file name to ST

#### call program 

```c
// ufilesystem.c
// try to use system calls about the file system

#include "kernel/types.h"
#include "kernel/stat.h"
#include "user/user.h"
#include "kernel/fcntl.h"

void print_stat(char *msg, struct stat *st);

int 
main() 
{
	int fd;
	struct stat st;

	mkdir("/dir");
	chdir("/dir");
	fd = open("file", O_CREATE|O_RDWR);
	
	stat("file", &st);
	print_stat("file", &st);

	link("/dir/file", "file_link");

	stat("file_link", &st);
	print_stat("fiel_link", &st);

	unlink("/dir/file");
	unlink("/dir/file_link");
	
	fstat(fd, &st);
	print_stat("fd", &st);

	close(fd);
	exit(0);
}

void 
print_stat(char *msg, struct stat *st) 
{
	printf("%s: dev=%d ino=%d type=%d nlink=%d size=%d\n", 
			msg, st->dev, st->ino, st->type, st->nlink, st->size);
}

```

* file 삭제

```c
fd = open("/tmp/xyz", O_CREATE|O_RDWR);
unlink("/tmp/xyz");  // nlink == 0

...

// temp file will be removed when:
close(fd);
// or:
exit();
```





 
